>> Funding for Frontline is
provided by:
The Park Foundation--
committed to raising public
awareness.
With major funding for News Wr
from the Richard and Rhoda
Goldman Foundation.
And additional funding from te
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
">> NARRATOR: Tonight,"
on Frontline:
>> The job of a reporter is to
be the curmudgeon who raises
questions that nobody else wants
to raise.
That's what the best reporters
try to do.
">> NARRATOR: Once upon a time,"
"they were thought
of as heroes,"
"but today, the entire news"
industry is in crisis.
>> The public has a terrific
disdain for the press.
>> We have a press that is at
war with an administration while
our country is at war against
merciless enemies.
>> For 30 or more years there
had been an assumption about the
"government and the press, and,"
"suddenly, in the
last couple of"
years that's changed.
>> NARRATOR: In a four-part
"special series, Frontline"
reporter Lowell Bergman looks at
the challenges facing
journalists today...
>> BERGMAN: Would you go to jail
to protect your sources?
>> Absolutely.
>> NARRATOR: ...the war between
the White House and the press...
>> The President of the United
"States saying,
""If you publish"
"this story, you
will have blood"
"on your hands."""
>> NARRATOR: ...the explosion of
new and emerging media...
>> Ever feel like the 6:00 news
just ain't cutting it for you?
>> You don't see anybody between
20 and 30 getting their news
from the evening news; you see
them getting it online.
>> NARRATOR: ...and the economic
realities of today's news
business.
>> If you have to make more
every year to keep the
shareholders happy...
>> NARRATOR: How did we get
here?
>> We're judging journalism by
the same standards that we apply
to entertainment.
That may be one of the greatest
tragedies in the history of
American journalism.
>> NARRATOR: And what is at
stake?
>> There's a dire need for
institutions that tell the
"truth, that pursue
the truth and"
that chase it at all cost.
">> NARRATOR:
Tonight, part three"
"of News War, a
Frontline special"
">> NARRATOR:
These days, one of"
the most country's influential
news programs is not a news
program at all.
(Daily Show theme song )
It airs on Comedy Central.
>> Welcome to the Daily Show!
">> NARRATOR: Each night, the"
Daily Show with Jon Stewart
relentlessly parodies broadcast
news.
>> Target: U.S.A.!
>> NARRATOR: The night we
"visited the show, they were"
skewering CNN for its fevered
coverage of the latest terror
threat.
">> Get the facts, not fear."
CNN Security Watch.
">> Facts, not fear!"
Not fear!
( laughter )
Even though we're using the fear
music with the fear voice and
the fear font!
( laughter )
That's to get your attention so
"we can tell you,
""Everything's"
"cool, don't be afraid."""
( laughter )
>> NARRATOR: This is what
Stewart's audience has come to
expect: a raucous dissection of
the content and conventions of
TV news.
>> What is the mindset?
"Having been a politician,"
obviously not in Washington...
">> NARRATOR:
Sometimes, it even"
makes news of its own.
Politicians show up to be
"interviewed, from former"
President Bill Clinton to
President Musharraf of Pakistan.
>> Where's Osama bin Laden?
( laughter )
>> I don't know.
Do you know?
"If you know where he is, you"
lead on and we'll follow you.
( laughter )
">> NARRATOR: A few years ago,"
America's TV critics declared
this comedy show to be the best
"news program on television, to"
the dismay of the show's
producers.
>> To the extent that people
"look to us as a
source of news,"
that is 100% indicative of other
people's failure and not our
success.
">> Now, of course
we don't want"
to give any wannabe terrorists
any ideas here on how to concoct
a bomb.
( laughter )
">> ""We don't want to tell the"
terrorists what to do.
That's coming up next in the
"Situation Room. """
( laughter )
">> I personally,
through working"
"at this job, have come to feel"
that the news media is even more
depressing than the news it
attempts and fails miserably to
report.
"I think it's horrible news,"
broadcast horribly.
>> That's our show.
"Here it is, your
moment of Zen."
( cheers and applause )
">> NARRATOR: For
all the jokes,"
something serious is happening
"to the news, and
not just on TV."
In the age of the internet and
"corporate media giants, the"
whole business of gathering and
reporting the news is in
turmoil.
Frontline reporter Lowell
Bergman set out to investigate
"what's happening
to journalism,"
how new technology and the media
marketplace are threatening
serious reporting and changing
the very definition of what we
call news.
>> Tonight on Primetime: Been
"there, done that?"
>> NARRATOR: This recent episode
of ABC's Primetime didn't just
document bad behavior in
"restaurants, it
added something"
extra.
>> But these diners haven't seen
What will they do when the
couple at the next table gets
affectionate?
>> NARRATOR: Using hidden
cameras and hiring actors has
also led to a series of highly-
rated scenarios ABC News calls
"""Basic Instincts."""
>> What would you do if you're
taking a stroll in the park and
you notice an elderly man in a
"wheelchair, his
caregiver being"
"verbally abusive, getting"
"physical, even violent?"
Would you keep on walking by?
Would you call 911?
>> Let's get down to business.
>> NARRATOR: This ABC News story
focused on moms and students who
strip.
"Critics argue
that the network,"
owned by the Walt Disney
Corporation...
>> I'm guessing they're thinking
about how hot we are.
>> NARRATOR: ...is being pushed
to get higher ratings by
producing entertainment programs
dressed up as news.
>> ...depraved a wasteland where
women are written off as immoral
lost souls.
>> It's easy to oversimplify.
"You know, network
news has just"
gone soft and it's because of a
profit motive.
And it makes a really good story
that particularly people in
print like to write.
I think the subject is more
complicated than that and more
subtle than that.
>> BERGMAN: In what way?
">> I think, in fact... I think"
the soft/hard distinction is
much harder than people would
like to make it out to be.
The profit motivation is clearly
an issue in the sense that we
need to return some reasonable
amount of income to Walt Disney
Company.
"By the way, the Walt Disney"
"Company knows and will say, if"
"you push them,
they don't expect"
us to help their stock price.
">> BERGMAN: No,
what I mean is,"
I look on the web...
>> Sure.
>> BERGMAN: ...and you see your
"programming for,
let's say, for"
primetime.
>> Right.
">> BERGMAN: And it's ""Teenage"
Girl Gets Ten Years for Oral
"Sex"" or ""Guides
to Teenagers for"
"Dating."""
That's news?
">> Well, I think news is what"
matters to people.
I think that really is... true
information about what matters
to people is news.
"I mean, you tell me..."
>> BERGMAN: But not current
affairs.
"I mean, this is
all information,"
but there was a time-- at least
in my lifetime-- when that would
not be considered news.
Has the standard for what
qualifies as news changed
primarily because of the
pressure of profits and ratings?
>> No.
The standard has changed-- and
"it's broadened, not lowered--"
because I will find you what you
"would perceive as a noble,"
serious news piece to match
every one of the examples that
you pick out of what you find
ignoble.
"So, it's broadened,
not lowered,"
but it's changed...
>> BERGMAN: I'm not saying it's
"ignoble, I'm saying... by the"
"way, I didn't say that."
"I'm saying it's
different, it's"
not news.
>> It's changed because there
are a wider number of outlets.
"We have 31 hours
of programming,"
plus we have radio 24 hours a
"day, plus we have, now, a web"
"site, so there's a wider range"
"of topics covered, absolutely."
>> You can state that the
administration is asking...
">> NARRATOR: At
ABC news, there"
has been a tradition of news
"documentaries and specials, as"
well as some serious work on
their magazine shows.
"And today, at
ABC, at least one"
investigative reporter is upbeat
about the future.
>> ...not based on what we
found.
>> NARRATOR: Brian Ross and his
team have been given a big staff
and budget to produce
investigative stories for all of
the ABC news programs.
>> In today's network news
"landscape, as I understand it,"
what really distinguishes one
network from another is original
reporting.
>> BERGMAN: But you know some of
the other stories that are on
the magazine shows...
">> Right, cover
a wide range of"
topics.
>> BERGMAN: That's the first
smile I've gotten from you.
>> ( laughs )
>> BERMAN: Why is that?
">> There are lots of stories,"
you know?
And... and a lot of stories that
"I wouldn't necessarily do, but"
you might watch.
Don't know.
"I mean, I... I
respect that, you"
"know, in the primetime area,"
there's a full range of stories.
And I think that's perfectly
fine and healthy.
>> This is Dateline this week.
"Tonight on Dateline, it's a"
whole new parade of suspected
predators.
>> NARRATOR: ABC News says it
turned down this program
designed to catch alleged sexual
"predators, but
it was picked up"
by NBC News.
>> I wasn't doing anything.
I wasn't doing anything.
>> NARRATOR: To Catch a
Predator is controversial.
NBC News is working directly
with the police and has a
financial arrangement with the
advocacy group doing the sting
operation.
>> His name is Muhammad.
>> NARRATOR: But NBC defends it
"as ""public service
investigative"
"journalism."""
>> We set up a house where a
young teen is...
">> Dateline, over the years,"
they've done tremendous pieces
and excellent reporting.
They've gone away from it more
"in recent years, and I think"
part of it is because it's
expensive.
I think there's conventional
wisdom that says that people are
less interested in Iraq and more
interested in that.
It's a different kind of
reporting.
"It's a niche that
they've found,"
and I think they've done better
with it than just about anything
else they've tried in recent
years.
">> Like moths to a flame,"
potential sex predators can't
stay away.
>> NARRATOR: It's a ratings hit
and very profitable.
NBC turned down Frontline's
requests for an interview.
">> Sir, I want to talk to you"
before you take off.
>> To the extent that we're now
judging journalism by the same
standards that we apply to
"entertainment--
in other words,"
"give the public what it wants,"
not necessarily what it ought to
"hear, what it
ought to see, what"
"it needs, but what it wants--"
that may prove to be one of the
greatest tragedies in the
>> Ten seconds.
>> You fellas ready?
Okay.
Ready on cue...
">> NARRATOR: These days, it"
takes a movie to remind people
about the public interest
origins of television news.
">> Three, two..."
>> And camera one...
>> Good evening.
"A few weeks ago,
there occurred"
a few obscure notices in the
newspapers about a lieutenant...
">> Well, when I first came to"
"CBS, the central thing that"
impressed me was their spirit of
"mission, to do quality news of"
integrity in the public service.
>> We're impressed with the
importance of this medium.
We shall hope to learn to use it
and not to abuse it.
>> And that permeated the halls
of CBS News.
"You could smell
it, see it, hear"
"it, feel it."
I would say the strongest early
reaction was what a powerful
sense of mission these people
have.
>> Now Senator McCarthy
claims...
>> NARRATOR: It wasn't just a
sense of mission; public service
was mandated by the government.
>> In the very early days of
"television news, the F.C.C."
still had teeth and still used
them every once and a while.
And there was that little
paragraph-- Section 315 of the
"F.C.C. Code-- that said, ""You"
shall operate in the public
"interest, convenience and"
"necessity."""
And what that meant was you had
to have a news division that
told people what was important
out there.
They didn't expect the news
divisions to make money.
"Then one day, along came this"
new program on CBS.
( stopwatch ticking )
>> I'm Mike Wallace.
>> I'm Morley Safer.
>> I'm Dan Rather.
>> And it wasn't an immediate
"success, but
after two or three"
"years, 60 Minutes
started to do"
something that no news program
had ever done before: It began
to turn a profit.
>> These Afghan clothes I'm
wearing are part of an operation
to sneak me and a CBS News film
crew into Afghanistan.
Here was a news program that was
becoming a tremendous profit
center.
And people in the corporate
"entity began to
say, ""Wow, you"
know what?
News can make money.
"And not only can
it make money,"
"it can make big money."""
">> And so, 60 Minutes begat"
"20/20, and 20/20 begat"
"Dateline, and Dateline begat"
"Primetime Live, and there wasa"
biblical epic of begatting that
went on in the television
industry.
"And now, all of
a sudden, making"
money became part of what we
">> NARRATOR:
Then, in the '80s,"
"with Reagan-era deregulation,"
there was a series of corporate
takeovers.
"Capital Cities bought ABC,"
"General Electric
bought NBC, and"
Larry Tisch of the Loews
Corporation took over CBS.
>> And Tisch looked at a very
"fat CBS and said,
""I'll bet that"
I can cut 33% of this
organization out and deliver a
product that is 90% as good.
"And if I can do
that, I can make"
"Wall Street
incredibly happy, I"
"can make my
stockholders happy,"
and that's what business is
"about."""
">> NARRATOR: In 1987, Tisch"
ordered the biggest budget cuts
in the history of CBS News.
>> BERGMAN: This period in the
'80s where you have
"deregulation, you have an"
"experienced money man, Larry"
"Tisch, comes in and cuts CBS"
"News down to size, cuts you"
down.
>> I think the biggest
difficulty was-- and he said
"this in my presence once, he"
"said, ""Dan, your
problem is you"
don't understand business.
You're a good reporter and I'm
"glad you're with us, but you"
"don't understand business."""
"Well, the difficulty was that"
Larry Tisch did understand
"business, but he didn't"
understand this business.
">> When Larry
Tisch left CBS, it"
was not the same news
organization by a lot that was
there when he came.
>> This is the CBS Evening News.
>> NARRATOR: The once top-rated
CBS Evening News fell to third
"place and has, for the most"
"part, stayed there."
">> Hi, everyone."
I'm very happy to be with you
tonight.
>> NARRATOR: The present owners
are betting they'll find a new
audience with a popular new
"anchor, recently
signed for $13"
million a year.
>> They're tough times.
It really has been hard to cover
the news and cover the world.
"I used to run
the Evening News,"
and I know that the budget that
I had to cover the news was a
lot more... was more significant
than the Evening News has today.
It makes it much more difficult.
>> We're going to turn to
politics next.
The election...
>> NARRATOR: Most Americans
still get their news from
"television, but the amount of"
hard news they're getting keeps
shrinking.
>> An exclusive first look at
Vanity Fair's newest cover
girl.
>> Across the country and around
the world...
>> NARRATOR: Cable television
initially came along as a
"serious 24/7 news alternative,"
but competition has pushed it
away from original reporting.
>> I think what happened around
the year 2000 was you had many
more outlets.
You could have dozens or more
cable stations.
"You know, you could have talk"
"radio, and in
order to stand out"
"in an environment
like that, you"
didn't have to get a broad-based
audience the way CBS Evening
News with Walter Cronkite
"saying, ""That's
the way it is,"""
would do.
You really just had to get a
"passionate, and sometimes"
"narrow, audience."
"And to get that, it worked"
better to be opinion-based.
>> They didn't like the big
spending...
>> Didn't like big spending.
But you think the Democrats are
going to little spenders?
You think the Democrats are
going to be little spenders?
">> At CNN, at Time Warner and"
with people that I had worked
"with our whole
lives, we really"
"wanted to say, ""Opinion-based"
"journalism has
its role, but we"
still want to have reporter-
"based journalism
in some places,"
and that's what Time magazine
should be.
"That's what CNN should be."""
>> There are illegal immigrants
pouring into the United States--
most of them here in California-
#NAME?
each and every year.
>> NARRATOR: But in recent
"years, even CNN has been"
trending more toward opinion and
commentary.
>> American farmers tonight are
complaining that they are being
unfairly burdened by laws...
>> Most people know this is an
act of desperation.
>> Simply passing on rumors is
not journalism.
">> ...this death,
which could be"
a homicide.
>> Simply telling people what
you think they want to hear is
not journalism.
">> Art, Art, Art, what do you"
mean?
Will an embalmed body yield pure
evidence?
People are exhumed all the time.
>> The effect has been to drain
out the sense of public service
out of television news to the
point where it's almost
completely gone.
( stopwatch ticking )
">> The story I'm telling you,"
I've never told no one.
>> NARRATOR: 60 Minutes remains
the most popular news program on
television.
It's always managed to keep a
mix of serious reporting
together with celebrity profiles
and soft features.
>> ( laughs )
>> NARRATOR: But the show's new
"executive producer,
Jeff Fager,"
says his audience is aging like
"that of all of
network news, and"
he's looking to the internet for
his future.
">> Hey, Jeff."
>> Hi.
>> They're working on the Yahoo
"piece for this week, which is"
"going to be, as we discussed,"
Netflix.
>> I don't think we've seen the
model-- I know we haven't seen
the model-- for how broadcast
journalism is going to end up on
the internet.
But it has to go there.
It has to.
"I mean, you don't see anybody"
between 20 and 30 getting their
news from the evening news; you
see them getting it online.
>> NARRATOR: So Fager did a deal
with internet giant Yahoo to
help bring 60 Minutes to a new
web audience.
">> Jeff Fager, who runs the"
"operation, is
actually somewhat"
"visionary, I
think, at least for"
"a big, old-line,
broadcast news"
"division, in terms of thinking"
about how to evolve the brand.
"They know that
60 Minutes, while"
it is a real crown jewel of
American journalism as a brand
and as a franchise-- there's no
question about that-- but they
"know that their
audience is, you"
"know, 55 and up."
>> NARRATOR: Starting with this
"profile of Tiger Woods, Yahoo"
began posting some of 60
"Minutes' mostly lighter, more"
"popular stories, along with"
footage that didn't make it on
air.
">> So if I take
that camera out,"
would it be bad?
>> NARRATOR: All of it is
chopped up to appeal to Yahoo's
younger web-savvy audience.
( laughter )
>> People that are consuming
news or other information online
do so in... in a mode that we
"refer to as ""info snacking."""
"So they'll read a piece, or"
"they'll read part of a piece,"
and then they'll see a link.
They'll follow that link.
They'll go read that thing.
So by taking the content that we
got from 60 Minutes and chunking
"it into, you know,
two- to four-"
"minute segments,
we just gave a"
much richer experience.
>> BERGMAN: What's the result
been in terms of... has it
driven new viewers to the show?
>> I can't tell.
It's too early to tell if it
has.
But millions of streams have
been played in the first few
months that we've been on
Yahoo-- 20 million streams in
"two months, which is a lot."
>> NARRATOR: The question is
whether this web experiment will
help pay for the more serious
journalism on 60 Minutes.
>> BERGMAN: Our reporting shows
"that the revenue
coming to CBS,"
"for instance, as a whole, as a"
"company, from the internet is"
"like this, compared to the"
revenue that's coming from
normal advertising.
>> Yeah.
>> BERGMAN: This is in its
"infancy, really, from an"
economics point of view.
">> It is, it is."
"I mean, you see the figures in"
terms of advertising on the
"internet, though,
and they're up"
30% and 40% a year.
"So, everybody, I think, is"
crossing their fingers that we
start to make real money on the
internet.
"Right now, we're not."
"Right now, we're
barely breaking"
even on the internet.
>> I think the biggest cause
for... for tumult right now is
that the economic underpinning
for all these news organizations
"is changing, and it's changing"
because the audience is
changing.
">> NARRATOR: Larry Kramer, a"
veteran newspaper reporter and
"editor, became
rich figuring out"
how to do news on the internet
when he created marketwatch.com.
Now he's trying to help CBS
figure out its digital future.
>> The audience are much more in
command of when they want news
"and information,
and they can go"
and get it.
"And we can't, as newspapers or"
"television or
radio, ignore that"
fact.
And if we want to be delivering
the news to as many people as
"we... in ten
years from now, to"
as many people as we're
"delivering it to today, we'd"
better get on these new
platforms.
"We'd better be
delivering it, or"
someone else is going to.
>> NARRATOR: The biggest new
player in the online world is
"undoubtedly
Google, now said to"
be worth $148 billion.
From its campus in Silicon
"Valley, Google
has become a key"
link connecting Americans to
their news.
>> Being online is the future.
"Many, many organizations have"
talked and talked about these
"changes, but the fact of the"
matter is the time is now.
People who bet against the
"internet, who
think that somehow"
this change is just a
"generational shift
or something,"
miss that it is a fundamental
reorganizing of the power of the
end user.
>> NARRATOR: In this new media
"world, consumers are demanding"
news and entertainment when and
"where they want it, often"
creating it themselves.
The old media are scrambling to
keep up.
>> BERGMAN: I'm an aging
reporter who would be considered
part of the mainstream media at
this point.
What can Google do for me or the
kind of reporting that I've done
over the years?
">> In the best
case, there will"
be a small number of places that
"we will go five
years, ten years"
"from now, where tremendous"
"reporting is being done, and"
people will pay for that.
But the new reporters are not
going to follow the traditional
path.
They won't be as tied to the
traditional newspapers.
They're going to be online
"reporters,
bloggers, man on the"
"street, that sort
of thing, and"
they're now part of the whole
news calculation around the
world.
">> Hello and good Monday, June"
"5, 2006."
"I'm Amanda Congdon,
and this is"
Rocketboom.
>> NARRATOR: Rocketboom is part
of this new universe of online
"media-- a short, daily webcast"
of news and humorous feature
stories presented in mock TV
news style.
>> Ever feel like the 6:00 news
just ain't cutting it for you?
">> Currently, we
have around..."
"between 400,000 and 500,000"
daily downloads of our videos.
And if we have like a really
"exceptional episode
or one that,"
"you know, strikes
a larger chord"
"than normal, it
could be up to a"
million.
>> Donald Rumsfeld pledged to
pursue additional opportunities
to outsource...
>> NARRATOR: Rocketboom has as
many viewers as some cable news
"shows, but they do it on the"
cheap.
">> I don't know, somebody..."
ooh!
( laughs )
">> Well, most of
the history of"
"Rocketboom, we've used one"
camera and one laptop and two
lights.
"And so, each day, you know,"
having had those already laying
"around, you know, to start up,"
we really didn't need anything
but just household stuff like
scissors and tape.
( laughs )
Can you see that?
>> I do.
>> You can put it up on a web
"site or put it up online, and"
"then, in a moment, it's"
available to everybody in the
whole world.
>> We go to Central Africa
"today, thanks to
Ruud Elmendorp,"
who sent us some extremely rare
footage.
">> Mr. Kony, what about the"
atrocities?
>> Those atrocities which was
"happened in
Uganda, that is not"
me or that is not my people.
>> NARRATOR: While Rocketboom
"does feature actual news, like"
this story about a rebel army in
"Uganda, their choices are"
"random, whatever strikes their"
fancy that day.
>> We never considered ourselves
"journalists,
or... I mean, I've"
never studied journalism at all
and have never been interested
"in journalism, or even really"
given it much thought.
"You know, I haven't thought"
through the kinds of things that
journalists are supposed to
think through.
"Yeah, that sounds better."
">> That sounds better, doesn't"
it?
>> Yeah.
>> We got a pen handy?
">> Nevertheless, the activity"
"that we're doing, people are"
identifying it as acts of
journalism.
>> Ruud took his camera inside a
press conference held just last
week between...
">> Whether it is or it isn't,"
it's creating a conversation
about what is journalism.
>> I am about to go and
"interview Josh Wolf, who has"
been jailed for independent
journalism.
>> NARRATOR: Amanda Congdon left
Rocketboom and took to the rod
"to meet other ""citizen"
"journalists."""
>> Hey.
"As you probably
know, I shoot a"
lot of political protests for my
blog.
It's kind of my beat that I
cover.
>> NARRATOR: It's a rapidly
expanding network.
( applause )
"Here, in Las Vegas last year,"
over a thousand people showed up
for a convention called the
"""Yearly Kos."""
( applause )
At the center of it all is
Markos Moulitsas...
>> Real solutions to this real
world...
>> NARRATOR: ...the founder of
one of the most popular blogs on
"the internet, the Daily Kos."
">> Keep doing
what you're doing,"
this is great stuff.
( applause )
People want to be part of the
media.
They don't want to sit there and
listen anymore.
"They're too educated, they're"
taught to have initiative and be
"go-getters, and
not to sit back"
and be passive consumers.
And the traditional media is
still predicated on the passive
consumer model.
You sit there and watch.
>> NARRATOR: As someone who
writes a highly personal and
opinionated blog that's become a
"rallying point for liberals,"
Moulitsas doesn't accept the
traditional boundaries between
journalism and activism.
>> One of many beauties of what
"I'm doing, of citizen media,"
"blogging world, is nobody's"
going to tell me what I can or
cannot do.
I can do whatever I want.
And I can... if tomorrow I want
"to write a poem and be a poet,"
then tomorrow I'll write a poem
"and be a poet, and nobody can"
tell me I can or can't do that.
And I think it's one reason
people have really taken to this
"medium, because
they don't like"
to be told what they can or
cannot do.
>> Not all bloggers want to be
journalists.
The Pew recently did a survey
and found that 33% of bloggers
think they're doing anything
related to journalism.
The rest are just people
"talking, and
that's how I define"
blogs.
Blogs are people talking.
"But then above that, yes, some"
people do choose to do
journalism.
They find out something and they
"report that to the world, and"
they do it accurately and they
do it fairly and they do it
"completely, and
you can have the"
exact same standards as a
journalist.
">> I am here with Jeff Jarvis,"
"founder of Buzzmachine.com,"
former critic for TV Guide and
creator of Entertainment Weekly.
"Hi, Jeff."
">> Hi, there, Amanda."
>> NARRATOR: Blogger Jeff Jarvis
is one of the leading advocates
for a new digital democracy
where anyone with a laptop or a
cell phone can be a reporter.
>> Journalists aren't the only
ones with a license to operate
journalism.
Anyone can perform an act of
I think it's a big mistake to
define journalism by the person
who does it.
Anyone can do journalism.
When you witness news and you
can now capture that on your
"phone, you can
get... share that"
with the world over the
"internet, you're performing an"
act of journalism.
>> BERGMAN: But doesn't it make
"the term ""journalism"" almost"
meaningless?
"I'm a teenager,
and I'm walking"
down the street and taking
pictures on my phone-- that's an
act of journalism?
>> Sure.
If you're finding out something
that the world doesn't know and
"wants to know and
you tell them,"
yes.
Why does it have to be the
exclusive purview of somebody
who has a job and a suit and a
tie and a notebook?
That's ridiculous.
>> All that citizen stuff is
valuable.
There's no reason not to have
it.
But I don't see it producing...
I see it producing an effusion
"of commentary,
which is healthy"
"in a free society, but I don't"
see it producing lots and lots
and lots of new information.
>> NARRATOR: In a provocative
piece published in the New
"Yorker last year, Nick Lemann"
praised online magazines like
"Slate and Salon, but he"
challenged Jeff Jarvis' claims
about blogs and citizen
journalism.
">> I compare them,
infuriatingly"
"to Jeff, to church
newsletters."
Nobody's against church
newsletters.
They're fun to read.
"They're, you know,
just comment."
They're like a community
bulletin board.
">> BERGMAN: Yeah, but you're"
belittling them.
">> Yes, I am
belittling them in"
that sense.
"I mean, I'm belittling them..."
>> BERGMAN: You're looking down
from on high here in uptown
Manhattan at the...
">> Yeah, fair enough."
>> BERGMAN: ...heights with
"Columbia University,
and saying,"
"""You guys are like a church"
"newsletter."""
">> It is, in fact, true that"
there isn't a lot of original
reporting that's being done by
bloggers and citizen
"journalists, at least in"
comparison to their...
>> BERGMAN: Reliable reporting.
>> Reliable and original
"reporting, sort of digging out"
new stuff instead of sort of
reprocessing the stuff that
other people have dug out
already.
">> BERGMAN: Nick Lemann says,"
"""Show me where,
on the internet,"
this vast group of citizen
journalists has actually done
some really strikingly new
"journalism."""
>> We're seeing the beginnings
of it.
And I would hope his response
"would have been,
""How can I find"
ways to do more of it with
"them?"""
I don't think we are very far
along in the path of the
development of blogging and
journalism.
I think there's much more to be
done.
But I don't think it's just
about reporting one story.
It's also about setting the
"agenda, it's also
about keeping"
stories alive and telling
mainstream media what they ought
to be doing.
">> NARRATOR: For
bloggers, this"
was a defining moment.
>> When Strom Thurmond ran for
"president, we voted for him."
We're proud of it.
( applause )
And if the rest of the country
"had followed our lead, we"
wouldn't have had all these
"problems over all these years,"
either.
">> NARRATOR: In 2002, while"
celebrating Strom Thurmond's
"100th birthday, Senator Trent"
Lott essentially endorsed
Thurmond's old segregationist
"policies, but no one in the"
national media took notice.
>> So when you unpacked what
"Trent Lott said, it was really"
egregious.
It was terrible.
"But no one did unpack it, and"
most of the news media just
ignored it.
>> NARRATOR: Josh Marshall wrote
for newspapers and magazines
before starting a popular
"liberal blog, the
Talking Points"
Memo.
>> In the way that the news
"media works, a
story really has"
a 24-hour audition-- that it
makes its case whether it's
"going to catch fire, whether"
it's going to become a real
story-- and that story failed
its 24-hour audition.
And that would have been... I
"think in a pre-blog
world, that"
would have been the end of it.
But my blog and others picked up
the story and basically started
"making the case
for it, that it"
was a lot more important than
the rest of the news media had
thought.
>> NARRATOR: Just two weeks
"later, Trent Lott resigned as"
Senate majority leader.
It was an affirmation of the
power of the blogs.
>> Good evening.
There are new questions tonight
about President Bush's service
in the Texas Air National Guard
in the late 1960s and early '70s
and about his insistence that...
">> NARRATOR: In
September, 2004,"
bloggers struck again.
"This time, it was
conservatives"
taking on what they felt was a
liberal mainstream media.
When CBS News claimed to have
incriminating documents about
President Bush's National Guard
"service, it caught
the interest"
of a conservative web log called
Power Line.
Scott Johnson posted questions
about the story.
"Soon, information that raised"
doubts about CBS's documents
began streaming in from around
the blogosphere.
>> We knew nothing.
The information that we
contributed was from people who
did know something and who read
our site or who were directed to
our site during the morning or
during the day.
And it really illustrated
something about the power of the
medium that it could draw on the
expertise of so many people over
such a short period of time.
">> Today, on the internet and"
"elsewhere, some people,"
including many who are partisan
political operatives...
>> NARRATOR: Dan Rather
"dismissed it as politics, but"
"the bloggers persisted, and"
Rather ultimately had to retract
the story.
">> At the time, CBS News and"
this reporter fully believed the
documents were genuine.
"Tonight, after further"
"investigation,
we can no longer"
vouch for their authenticity.
>> The first question I had that
"day was, are we far out on the"
end of a limb that's going to be
sawed out and are we going to
"lose the credibility, whatever"
credibility we built up in the
previous several years working
on the site?
The question I had later that
morning was how many times has
CBS done this before and gotten
away with it?
>> It was a mistake.
CBS News deeply regrets it.
"Also, I want to say personally"
"and directly, I'm sorry."
CBS News President Andrew...
>> NARRATOR: The bloggers
"claimed victory,
and Rather was"
effectively pushed out after 44
years at CBS News.
>> BERGMAN: Your departure from
"CBS, and CBS
obviously not being"
"happy with the
story in the end,"
how were you treated?
>> I think I'll let other people
answer that.
"I'm looking
forward, moving on."
"It's a fair question, but I'm"
not going to answer that.
>> Ever watched a television
newscast and thought about
what's been left out or
overlooked?
Ever wondered how decisions are
made in the newsroom?
Maybe right now you're asking
"yourself, ""Who let this"
"knucklehead on the air?"""
>> NARRATOR: In the midst of the
"Rather debacle, CBS News tried"
to embrace the internet.
">> It's called
""Public Eye,"" and"
it's one of those things called
a blog.
>> NARRATOR: In an effort to be
"more transparent, CBS News now"
has a blog about itself which
deals with journalistic ethics
and answers viewer criticisms.
It also posts video of its new
anchor sharing her personal
thoughts in a feature called
">> Hi, everyone."
"As I approach my
50th birthday,"
I've come to an important
conclusion.
People can be divided into two
categories: those who rinse or
wash their dishes before putting
"them in the dishwasher, and"
those who don't.
">> NARRATOR: Over at ABC News,"
Brian Ross' investigative unit
"has started its
own blog, a web"
"site called ""The
Blotter,"" which"
they use to solicit anonymous
news tips.
">> Some people say, ""Fed-Ex"
"wants to kill
me,"" ""My cat has"
"disappeared,""
""My plumber is a"
"crook."""
"But somebody might
say, ""Do you"
really want to know a little
more about Mark Foley?
Because I don't think you have
"the whole story."""
"And the rest, as they say, is"
history.
>> Florida Republican
Congressman Mark Foley resigned
today effective immediately
after sexually explicit messages
sent to underage boys
surfaced...
>> NARRATOR: A major story that
broke at the height of the
midterm elections actually came
about through tips to the Brian
Ross web site.
>> The producer I've worked with
for years got a lead from
somebody that there were some e-
mails of a congressman hitting
on a page.
So we wrote the story.
This was the first story right
here.
"It went out, and
it was a story"
that probably wouldn't have been
"on World News:
""16-Year-Old Who"
Worked as... Concerned About E-
"mail Exchange with
Congressman."""
After we posted that story
"online, we began
to hear from a"
number of other pages who sent
these much more explicit instant
messages.
When the Congressman realized we
"had them, he resigned, Terry."
>> BERGMAN: Could this be the
first news break on the
internet?
>> Mainstream media newsbreak?
I think it was.
I think it was a story that
really developed and broke on
the internet by a mainstream
"operation, by ABC News."
>> NARRATOR: ABC News is also
hedging its bets about what
might prove popular on the web.
Just one click away from the
Brian Ross investigative unit...
">> Hello, and welcome."
"I'm Amanda Congdon, video"
blogging for ABC News.
>> NARRATOR: ...Congdon has made
the jump from a cult show on the
web to the mainstream media.
>> So whip that camera out.
Let's reinvent the whole host-
viewer relationship and truly
make this a two-way street.
>> Remember when a mouse on your
desk was hard to handle?
>> ( screaming )
>> Make the digital
revolution...
>> NARRATOR: At the start of the
"internet boom,
NBC was the first"
to try to make the move onto the
internet.
They partnered with Microsoft
and confidently announced the
beginning of a new era.
">> On July 15, NBC News and"
Microsoft will revolutionize the
way you get news.
>> NARRATOR: There was a lot of
excited talk about
"""convergence,""
the idea that TV"
"stations, internet
companies and"
newspapers would combine forces
and create profitable new
"""synergies."""
>> We're going to really be able
"to change news making, to do"
something very unique.
">> NARRATOR: Ten years later,"
MSNBC survived the dot-com crash
and is now the number two news
"site on the web, close behind"
"the leader, Yahoo."
"Scott Moore, who used to run"
"MSNBC, is now
the head of Yahoo"
News.
>> BERGMAN: You see a future
where Yahoo might have enough
profits to have its own
reporters?
>> I think it certainly is
possible.
"We could today if we chose to,"
and we do have a couple of
projects.
Kevin Sites in the Hot Zone.
We have another project coming
out in January that's called
"""Odd News
Underground,"" and it"
involves a journalist who also
writes songs.
"So it's a singing reporter, if"
"you will, and he will be"
covering a number of very
interesting sort of eccentric
subject areas.
>> It's about this cowboy
called Doug Graf and his alter
ego.
>> So we will experiment a
little bit and we will innovate
where we can with journalism.
But we really don't need to go
out and hire an army of
reporters.
>> If you witness something
compelling and capture it on
"video, send it to us."
It's your turn to tell the
story.
">> NARRATOR: Kevin Sites, who"
had reported from Iraq and
"Afghanistan, was
hired by Yahoo"
as its first full-time video
journalist.
">> BERGMAN: Basically, are you"
it in terms of Yahoo's
independent reporting staff?
>> As far as the reporting face
going out and collecting the
"material, I'm it."
But I've got a mission control
team that helps me put all this
together.
"In fact, they do put it"
They're the ones that actually
post it on the net.
"You know, they're
the catchers,"
getting all the information from
the field and probably doing the
heavy lifting.
">> BERGMAN: So, you're the"
pretty face?
>> You're looking at it.
( laughs )
I wouldn't say it's the pretty
one.
It's the face.
( laughs )
I think news organizations are
much more willing to send out
"independent ""sojos""-- solo"
journalists like myself-- into
war zones.
They don't necessarily want them
"to do what you're doing, you"
"know, an extensive
documentary,"
because they're not going to get
the same kind of product.
>> NARRATOR: But Yahoo News
depends primarily on the
"reporting of others, like the"
"Associated Press and Reuters,"
"which they pay
for, unlike their"
"rival, Google."
>> We made an explicit decision
not to get into the content
business.
We decided explicitly to let
"many people produce
content, and"
we would develop advertising
solutions that would help pay
for the new content that they're
building.
And that's our focus.
>> NARRATOR: Google's news site
"is popular, but
it's essentially"
a collection of headlines and
links to newspaper reporting.
>> There's no question that we
depend critically upon reporters
"reporting new facts, new"
"stories, new ideas."
Who's going to write it if it's
not the reporters?
And almost all interesting news
seems to start from a reporter
on a beat in a country
uncovering something or
reporting their observations
about what they're seeing.
>> NARRATOR: This is what
worries longtime newspaper
"editor John Carroll, that the"
"news we get from the internet,"
like the news we get from
"television, is almost totally"
dependent on reporting done by
"newspapers, and newspapers are"
threatened.
>> I'd estimate that roughly 85%
of the original reporting that
gets done in the America is done
by newspapers.
They're the people who are going
out and knocking on doors and
rummaging through records and
covering events and so on.
And most of the other media that
provide news to people are
really recycling news that's
gathered by newspapers.
The web opens up vast
possibilities for good
journalism and already has
created many new voices that are
valuable.
I don't think we can turn this
thing over entirely to bloggers
and citizen journalists.
"They're valuable,
but there are"
>> NARRATOR: In a building in
"South Los Angeles, an old"
business continues to roll out
the news the same way it has for
over a century.
For nearly all of its 125-year
"history, the Los Angeles Times"
"was owned by one family, the"
"Chandlers, until, in 2000, the"
latest generation sold it off.
This is the story about what has
happened to the Los Angeles
Times.
It's the story of American
journalism and the turmoil going
on inside newsrooms across the
country.
It all began with an $8.3
billion deal that the Chicago-
based Tribune Company hoped
would be the start of a new
media empire.
>> They bought Times-Mirror
"newspapers, which included the"
"Los Angeles Times, Baltimore"
"Sun and Newsday, and some"
others.
"At the time, I
was editor of the"
"Baltimore Sun, and they said,"
"""Will you go
out and be editor"
"of the L.A. Times?"""
"I said, ""Maybe,
what do you want"
"to do with it?"""
And they said they felt they
bought one of the crown jewels
"of American
journalism, and they"
wanted to keep it that way and
build it.
>> NARRATOR: But Carroll had to
deal with some big problems.
"Circulation had been slipping,"
and there'd been growing
tensions between the newsroom
and the last publisher.
Carroll's first move was to
recruit a managing editor from
"the New York
Times, Dean Baquet."
>> So we came in and it was a
"newsroom that was down, but it"
was a hell of a newsroom.
( laughs )
"I mean, if I came in and said"
that... I would not say that I
"walked in the door, or John"
"walked in the door, and picked"
it up off the ground.
I think it was like a Ferrari
that just needed to be reminded
that it was a Ferrari.
( laughs )
And that's what we did.
>> NARRATOR: Carroll and Baquet
revived the Times' tradition of
"pursuing big,
serious stories at"
home and abroad-- in-depth
investigations that serve the
public interest and win
journalism awards.
"Under their
leadership, the Los"
Angeles Times won 13 Pulitzer
Prizes.
>> I think that we won in the
course of the six years John and
"I were together
as many, if not"
"more, Pulitzer Prizes than any"
paper in the country.
Not that Pulitzer Prizes are a
"be all and end all, but for a"
paper that had a tarnished
"reputation, they
were important."
And I think they told the world
"that this paper
is coming back,"
and they told the paper and the
staff that we can run with
"anybody, we can compete with"
">> NARRATOR: But
in Chicago, the"
"home of Tribune Company, the"
journalistic direction of
the L.A. Times was not being
celebrated by the company's
major shareholders.
>> The writers and editors of
the L.A. Times want to have
their opinions read by their
"peers across the country, by"
politicians in New York and
"Washington, by the people who"
give away Pulitzer Prizes.
That's not what readers want.
>> NARRATOR: Ariel Capital is
one of Tribune Company's largest
shareholders.
>> Would you give me a call?
We are... it's getting close to
our target price.
>> NARRATOR: Charles Bobrinskoy
is Vice Chairman.
>> BERGMAN: When Tribune bought
"Times-Mirror, was that a good"
deal?
">> It was a terrible deal, and"
the market knew it at the time.
Tribune's stock declined
dramatically on the day they
announced they were buying
Times-Mirror.
They overpaid.
Everybody knew it at the time.
It wasn't a good deal.
"And that, unfortunately, has"
been the beginning of a lot of
the problems that we're
suffering with today.
>> I'm actually one of the
people who still think it was
"the right thing to do, smart"
strategically.
>> NARRATOR: David Hiller is a
"senior executive
at Tribune, and"
was one of the architects of the
Times-Mirror deal.
>> There are a lot of things
that happened after the merger
that nobody at the time
"predicted, including huge"
"recession, terrorist attack,"
bumps along the way.
But the core vision of what you
could do by putting these great
newspapers together was smart
"then, and I think it's smart"
>> NARRATOR: But the deal didn't
"play out as they thought, and"
with circulation continuing to
"fall, Tribune needed to find"
savings at the L.A. Times.
Printing and delivery account
for 70% of the cost of producing
"a newspaper, so this is where"
they started cutting.
"But soon, Tribune also wanted"
"cuts in the
newsroom, which had"
become the second largest in the
country.
>> It was clear that some cuts
had to be made.
I'm not sure that those were the
"right cuts, but at a certain"
"point, if you're going to lead"
your newsroom and the publisher
made a convincing case that we
"had to do layoffs,
you do them."
>> And they've cost cut every
year.
And for a while it was fine
because there really was
considerable fat in the
operation.
But after a while it began to
damage the business side of the
paper and its ability to keep
the circulation up.
It damaged the news side of the
paper.
It reduced the amount we were
able to give the reader.
>> The cuts started to be sort
of part of the life of the
"paper, and I
think this is true"
in a lot of papers.
"It wasn't just layoffs, it was"
"every few months... I mean,"
you'd start the year with a
"budget, and every few months"
you'd re-budget and you'd cut
"more newshole, more space for"
news.
>> It was happening at an
accelerating pace.
And it was happening at a time
when the paper was making lots
and lots of money.
>> NARRATOR: The L.A. Times was
taking in over a billion dollars
"a year, over $200 million in"
profits.
>> A typical newspaper makes a
20% operating margin.
That's roughly double what the
typical Fortune 500 company
makes.
"People think of us as a poor,"
"washed-up, old business."
It's not.
It makes tons of money.
Big money.
>> BERGMAN: So what's the
rationale behind that?
I don't understand it.
Why do you have to cut costs
when you're making hundreds of
millions of dollars?
>> Because you have to make more
every year than you made the
last year in order to keep the
shareholders happy.
"And so, even if
you made barrels"
"full of money one year, you've"
got to make more than that the
next year.
>> BERGMAN: The Los Angeles
Times grosses over a billion
"dollars a year, and apparently"
over $200 million a year in
profit.
Is that about accurate?
>> Yes.
>> BERGMAN: It's a pretty good
business.
>> It's a very good business.
>> BERGMAN: It makes a lot of
money.
>> Yes.
>> BERGMAN: So what's the
financial problem?
>> The issue for the whole
"newspaper industry,
not just the"
"Los Angeles Times, is what's"
the financial trajectory of the
business over time?
Is it getting bigger or is it
getting smaller?
That's plainly the concern that
the investors have and why Wall
Street is being so harsh on
newspaper companies at the
present time.
">> BERGMAN: Your stock, for"
instance.
">> In our stock, but all..."
"Knight Ridder's stock, until"
"they were sold, New York"
"Times stock today, McClatchy"
stock.
The question is not about how
"you are doing today, but the"
question is how are you going to
be doing in the future?
>> NARRATOR: The big worry on
Wall Street is that profits from
newspapers will vanish over the
next few years as the major
papers lose advertising dollars
to the web almost as fast as
they're losing readers.
>> Newspapers are not a growth
business.
The industry is under enormous
financial pressure.
"And so, to invest in these"
"stocks with a very, very"
uncertain future is a challenge.
And the advice that we've given
"our clients is, ""Stay on the"
sidelines until we can figure
"out what the
growth rate is, if"
there's a growth rate.
"But until then,
you really don't"
"need to own the stocks."""
"At one point at their peak,"
newspapers were generating close
to 70% of their pre-tax profits
from their classified
advertising.
"Today, a good portion of help"
wanted classified has gone
online.
>> NARRATOR: People looking for
"cars, jobs and places to live"
are now going online instead of
"browsing newspapers, and ad"
dollars are following those
eyeballs.
>> It's just amazing what you
can do online.
It's just better online.
That's ultimately why the
newspaper industry is under
pressure.
"Classifieds are better online,"
period.
>> NARRATOR: One of the biggest
players in the online classified
ad business is based in a modest
house in San Francisco.
Craigslist began in the late
'90s as an online community
bulletin board set up by
computer programmer Craig
Newmark to service what he calls
"his ""nerd subculture."""
>> BERGMAN: How big are you?
And I don't mean in size.
>> ( laughs )
"I tell people 5'7"", but it's"
"5'6.5""."
Our little company has 24 people
right now.
We're in over 300 cities and
"around 35 countries, getting"
well over five billion page
"views a month, increasing all"
the time.
>> BERGMAN: Can we say that the
company is... that you started
is now worth $30 million?
$40 million?
$50 million?
Or more?
>> We actually don't know.
I've seen current estimates
anywhere from $250 million to
$2.4 billion.
I don't believe any of it.
"I don't care, except it's"
flattering.
Who cares?
We're not selling.
It doesn't matter.
>> NARRATOR: There is almost no
way for a newspaper to compete
with ads on craigslist because
"they're free, except for help"
wanted ads and apartment rentals
in some cities like New York.
"Newmark, whose site is one of"
"the top destinations
on the web,"
says he did not set out to
undermine the economics of the
newspaper business.
">> BERGMAN: By 2000, you're"
"going pretty
great guns, things"
"are expanding, right?"
>> Yes.
>> BERGMAN: Which means you're
"taking more revenue away, in"
"terms of classified ads, from"
newspapers.
">> Well, it's not
clear because,"
"as far as we can
tell, a lot of"
the ads that are posted on our
site would never have gone to
newspapers.
Depending on whose opinion you
"agree with, a lot of the ads"
that aren't going to newspapers
are going to sites like Monster
and Autotrader.
>> BERGMAN: But it's the flight
of that kind of advertising to
various internet sites that's
beginning to make a big impact
on newspapers.
>> I agree.
>> One of the unintended
negative consequences of online
advertising has been the loss of
value in traditional
classifieds.
It's really affected the
economics of newspapers.
No one has yet figured out a way
to fill up all that money with a
different source to help pay for
the newspapers.
>> BERGMAN: Some major
"newspapers, like
the Los Angeles"
"Times, for instance, is under"
stress because of the change in
economics related to the
"internet, but yet they are a"
"content provider
for you, right?"
">> We're, in fact, critically"
dependent upon the success of
these newspapers.
So anything that screws up their
"economics, that causes them to"
"get rid of reporters, is a"
really bad thing.
The fact of the matter is that
"the consumption
for news is up,"
but the way in which people
consume news has changed.
"And it's affected
newspapers, in"
"a business sense, pretty"
negatively.
>> BERGMAN: Why don't you just
buy the L.A. Times and save that
content-producing organization
"as part of your operation, and"
make them more web friendly and
preserve an institution?
">> My personal opinion is, I"
don't... I'm not eager to take
"that challenge on, to try to"
adapt a business that is mature
or in some slight decline and
try to make that transition to
the web.
>> BERGMAN: It's old.
>> We don't have to.
"Well, it's old
and any business"
"that is mature and is kind of,"
"you know, beginning to be"
usurped by some new technology
or some new means of
distribution is going to face
big challenges and is going to
have a lot of hard decisions to
>> NARRATOR: Back in Los
"Angeles, pressure
for cuts kept"
coming from the Tribune Company.
"In July 2005, editor John"
Carroll resigned.
>> I was pushing people out the
"door, reducing staff and"
"reducing pages in the paper,"
which no editor likes to do.
That was something that can't go
"on forever, and it was really"
crucial to why I decided to
leave the paper.
>> NARRATOR: Dean Baquet was now
editor and was facing what he
hoped would be a last round of
"cuts with the new publisher, a"
"longtime Tribune
executive, Jeff"
Johnson.
">> As publisher, you know, I"
knew as we kind of came to the
end of 2005 that we had to do
what I called some
"restructuring, and we went"
through some difficult
decisions.
We closed one of our printing
plants.
We cut about 350 jobs out of the
newspaper across the board.
A little less than 100 of those
were out of the newsroom.
>> NARRATOR: Johnson had been
sent out from Chicago to handle
"the business side
of the paper,"
but now he began to have second
thoughts about the newspaper's
priorities.
>> Here's what I think happened
with Jeff.
He goes from being on the
"business side, an operations"
"guy, he takes on
the publisher's"
"chair, and, you know, suddenly"
your concerns are supposed to
widen.
You're supposed to care about
"the newsroom,
you're supposed to"
care about the mission of the
paper.
He got that and he just grew.
">> NARRATOR: In
September 2006,"
the fight to save the L.A. Times
"went public, as a group of"
prominent citizens sent an open
letter to the Tribune Company
protesting further staff cuts.
"Just a few days
later, publisher"
Jeff Johnson publicly defied his
"bosses in Tribune management,"
"saying, ""Newspapers can't cut"
"their way into the future."""
>> BERGMAN: You've been at the
company for 20-odd years and I
"got to believe, at a certain"
"point, when you
started arguing"
with or disagreeing with your
"superiors in Chicago, you knew"
you were taking your career in
your hands...
>> Sure.
>> BERGMAN: ...and maybe
"throwing it out the window, at"
least at the Tribune company.
>> Sure.
"I knew there was that risk,"
right.
>> BERGMAN: Why did you decide
to do that?
>> I think the industry has to
be careful to not let cost-
cutting be your main strategy.
You are going to have to get
"smarter about, you know, the"
"business and, you know, find"
"efficiencies and, at times,"
restructure to reflect what's
going on out there.
But you have got to have... what
do you believe in?
What are your primary goals?
"That's, that's what... what do"
you tell the troops?
"I mean, you can't stand up in"
"front of the troops and say,"
"""We're going to
cut our way into"
"the future,"" right?"
>> Big changes at the L.A.
Times.
One month after he defied a
"demand for staff cuts, the"
publisher of the Los Angeles
Times has been forced out.
Jeffrey M. Johnson had suggested
the job cuts demanded by the
parent company...
>> BERGMAN: You've known Mr.
Johnson for a long time.
>> Yes.
>> BERGMAN: You respect him.
>> Very fine guy.
>> BERGMAN: He drew a line in
the sand.
">> Yes, he did."
>> BERGMAN: And it became
public.
>> It did.
>> BERGMAN: On the pages of your
own newspaper.
>> On the pages of every
newspaper in the United States.
>> BERGMAN: Pretty unusual.
>> It was.
>> BERGMAN: Did he drink Kool-
"Aid, or what happened?"
">> I don't know,
and I can't..."
I can't speak for Jeff.
He's a fine person and a very
good friend.
"I think, ultimately,
people who"
are leading a business have to
"share the vision,
have to have a"
vision.
And if it's a different one from
the people who are the owners of
"the company,
that's not going to"
work for the long term.
>> The L.A. Times has got a new
president and publisher this
morning.
">> NARRATOR: The next day,"
Tribune announced that a new man
would be flying out from Chicago
to take over as publisher of the
L.A. Times.
David Hiller.
>> And now a new man set to run
"the whole thing, David Hiller."
>> ...leaves many at the paper
wondering about their future.
>> My plan and expectation is
that being a world-class
provider of foreign and national
news is going to continue to be
one of the hallmarks of the Los
Angeles Times.
>> BERGMAN: But with fewer
people?
">> Well, I don't know whether"
it's going to be with fewer
people or not.
"There you go
again, as they used"
"to say, being focused on the"
numbers of people and not on the
quality of the coverage.
>> BERGMAN: But who does
coverage?
"I mean, people do coverage."
">> Well, people do coverage,"
"and you do... yeah, people do"
coverage.
>> NARRATOR: With his newsroom
"threatened, editor Dean Baquet"
struggled to maintain morale.
>> That's a big story.
I just mean look at it with some
skepticism.
I think there's a tremendous
amount of anxiety right now
about newspapers and the threat
to newspapers.
And I think there is such a
threat.
I don't want this one to sound
"grandiose or
high-falutin', but"
I think a newspaper is a public
"trust, and I think
my mission is"
a public service mission.
There's tension between my view
of my world and the people who
own newspapers because they are
beholden to shareholders.
>> NARRATOR: In the six years
the Tribune had owned the Times-
"Mirror, its stock had lost"
value.
"To turn things around, the"
Tribune Company and its
investors now believed that
the L.A. Times needed to do more
local coverage.
">> Where the
problem is, is that"
the people who are writing the
"L.A. Times, they want to be"
writing about international
events.
They want to be writing long-
term pieces about why Bush went
to war in Iraq.
"And we're saying,
and the people"
"at the Tribune
are saying, there"
are other people writing those
stories.
Certainly you would agree with
me there's no lack of coverage
on the issue of why Bush went to
war in Iraq.
Do we really need the L.A. Times
devoting the resources it has to
that story?
>> Even if every readership
survey said nobody wants to read
"about the war in
Iraq, I'm still"
going to cover the war in Iraq.
>> NARRATOR: Since the start of
"the war, the L.A.
Times has been"
one of the few newspapers to
maintain a full-time reporting
"presence in Iraq, with"
journalists like Alissa Rubin
risking their lives to get the
story.
">> I mean, we sort of have two"
bad choices.
We either go through this area
which is Haifa Street where
there's bombing and shooting and
I.E.D.s...
>> There are only three American
newspapers that are on the
ground in Iraq-- the L.A.
"Times, the New York Times, and"
the Washington Post.
U.S.A. Today goes in and out.
They have one person.
He's there on the ground
"sometimes, and
then he gets out."
The wires are obviously there
all the time.
>> Leaving the hotel is the most
dangerous thing we do every day.
>> But nobody else has a full-
time staff who's always there.
That's appalling.
The thought that we would reduce
"that to two, maybe even, one"
"day, one."
That can't be.
"I mean, that can't be good for"
the country.
>> We're saying there's a role
for probably three national
newspapers: the Wall Street
"Journal, the New
York Times and"
U.S.A. Today.
Each has its own niche.
All three are national
newspapers.
We don't think there's any
demand for a fourth.
"The demand is for
a very strong,"
high-quality local newspaper
focused on the things the people
"in L.A. care about-- style,"
"Hollywood,
entertainment, local"
"government, local
sports, local"
issues like immigration.
If he was focused on all those
"issues, there
would be a lot of"
demand for his product.
"Instead, he's trying to be the"
>> The idea that you're going to
"say to readers, ""Buy the L.A."
"Times, we will tell you what's"
going on with the traffic and
the schools and the cops and the
local stuff.
And if you want to know what's
"going on in Iraq,
go buy the New"
"York Times""... I mean, that"
doesn't sound like a terribly
"sound business
approach, either."
And I think if that's... if I
"were a Los
Angelino, I would be"
a little insulted by that.
I think the gravest danger
"facing our business is panic,"
panic that the stock price has
"gone down, panic that the ad"
"revenues are, you know, are"
moving away and that the only
way to keep up is to cut and cut
and cut.
And they end up downsizing and
hollowing out their reporting
and editing staffs.
">> No, my argument... my"
"argument was, invariably..."
>> NARRATOR: By the summer of
"2006, editor Dean Baquet was"
becoming a symbol for embattled
newspaper editors around the
country faced with similar
cutbacks.
>> If you are an editor at a
"newspaper, in
theory, you are a"
highly passionate human being.
You care about democracy.
You're really there to fight the
good fight.
You love investigative
journalism.
It's really expensive to do
that.
">> To be frank, it's not like"
there are eight news stories
fighting for the front...
>> And you can't really prove
that you sold more newspapers or
sold more advertising as a
"result of good, quality"
journalism.
>> This is the chicken and egg
problem.
"Do you do stories that, you"
"know, taste good, or do you do"
stories that are good for you?
And will people view and read
"stories that are good for you,"
or will they read the stories
that taste good.
It's a never-ending problem.
"I mean, I used to laugh at the"
Washington Post.
"We'd have every
Sunday, and many"
"days of the week, we'd have a"
story that would start on the
front page and-- down in the
corner-- and it would be two
columns wide and there would be
a headline and then there'd be a
"jump, and you'd
open up the page"
and there'd be two pages on the
inside on this story.
"And you go, ""Whoa!"""
"But the reality
is, most people"
didn't read all those stories.
They wanted those stories to be
there.
"But most importantly, they"
wanted to know that the
Washington Post was watching
these institutions and was
devoting the resources to see if
they were.. these people were
"being ripped off,
if we, as the"
"public, were being
ripped off in"
a way that we could never find
out ourselves.
That's great journalism.
That's still true.
I still think people want those
stories.
>> NARRATOR: Over 50 million
Americans still buy a newspaper
each day.
Twice that number read one.
But the number who buy the paper
"is steadily shrinking, and"
industry analysts say they know
why.
>> I don't think people pick up
a metropolitan newspaper today
to find out about the war in
Iraq or Israel.
I think they pick it up to find
out what's going on locally in
"terms of politics, in terms of"
"crime, in terms of high school"
sports.
"If I ran a local newspaper, I"
would go so heavily local that
it would turn people's heads.
>> With the combined news
resources of the Naples Daily
News and Bonita Daily
"News, this is the Studio 55"
vodcast.
>> NARRATOR: It's called
"""hyperlocalism,""
and Wall Street"
thinks it's the future of
newspapers in print and on the
web.
"This Naples,
Florida, Daily News"
vodcast was created by a web
pioneer named Rob Curley.
">> We'll say,
""As we first told"
"you on our web site."""
>> As first reported today on
"NaplesNews.com, steer clear of"
the water near the Naples pier
for the next few days.
">> We built this
daily newscast,"
and it was kind of put together
by the web staff...
">> Well, you can pick up"
groceries for less starting
today.
Albertson's will be closing its
north Naples location.
>> ...and available on TV or on
the web or on your iPod or
"iTunes, or whatever."
>> NARRATOR: Curley's idea was
to use new media to refocus
newspapers locally on their own
backyards.
He began at a small paper in
"Lawrence, Kansas."
>> We launched a section called
"""Game."""
"And the idea
behind ""Game"" was"
we were going to cover
children's baseball and softball
and t-ball like they were the
New York Yankees.
And you could... if you wanted
to know what games were all at
"this field this
week, you could"
"click on that,
and here is every"
game at that field.
Or if you wanted to see what the
"field looked like,
here's one of"
"those crazy, steerable 360-"
"degree photos where, you know,"
you can click on it and steer it
and those sorts of things.
"A newspaper web
site, to me, is"
just another way of serving its
audience any way that it wants
to be served.
If they want to have paper
"thrown on their driveway, then"
we want to make sure they get it
from us.
But if they want to get an audio
"podcast, let's
make sure they're"
getting it from us.
"If they want to
get video news,"
let's make sure they're getting
it from us.
"So, for me, it's just taking"
that... that... the power of our
news reporting skills and
leveraging it every way we can.
>> Rob's been... he's kind of
the forefront of what's been
going on in online newspapers
for probably ten years now.
He's been one of the real
proponents of hyperlocal.
It's getting... it's saturating
a local community with so much
"information that, you know,"
"anything you need to know, you"
go to lawrence.com and you can
find it.
Anything you need to know about
"Naples, go to naplesnews.com."
"In experiment with hyperlocal,"
you can't do better than having
Rob on your side.
So that's why we hired him.
>> When you think of Washington
"Post journalism, you think of,"
"you know, in-depth interviews"
with Rumsfeld.
">> NARRATOR: Now at the Post,"
Rob Curley's trying to adapt
hyperlocalism to the big city.
>> What about the people who
live here?
"To me, they're just so"
fascinating.
>> It's actually going to suck
more when I actually grow up.
I know that.
>> NARRATOR: Curley is just one
part of the Post's aggressive
transformation for the digital
age.
"In the Post's new
""converged"""
"newsroom, reporters now feed"
stories to Washington Post
"radio, local TV, and the"
internet.
>> ...caught an early screening
of it and dissected for our
readers just everything that The
Sentinel gets wrong about D.C.
>> We have 50 reporters a week
who come on and do live
discussions and answer questions
from readers for an hour.
We have 50 reporters walking
around carrying video cameras
with them so when something
"happens, they can
shoot video in"
addition to what they're
reporting.
>> And I'd done what I thought
was a final interview of Mark
"Jones, the team leader, when a"
rocket-propelled grenade
exploded nearby.
">> NARRATOR: In
May, 2006, Post"
reporter Nelson Hernandez was
ambushed on a patrol in Baghdad.
>> So the convoy's guard shot
back at the insurgents.
>> And instead of hitting the
ground like most of us would
"have, he pulled the camera out"
and started filming this
firefight.
And he sent back the video and
"was like, ""What
do you think of"
"this?"""
"""It's pretty good."""
"So we put it up
on the site, ran"
"it, got a ton of traffic."
"We put it up on
YouTube, we got"
some traffic there.
And I think... so it's adding to
the journalism and understanding
that you have this great way to
get additional content out that
you generate in the course of
your journalism.
>> I think that the Washington
"Post first, followed by the Nw"
"York Times, were really quick"
to embrace the internet.
I think that a lot of other
"newspapers, including the L.A."
"Times, were slow."
Journalists were slow to embrace
it.
I'll own up to that.
I think business sides of
newspapers were slow to embrace
"it, too, because
they thought it"
wouldn't... they didn't see how
they were going to make money
from it.
So we were slow.
"But, my God, what a good thing"
it is now.
>> You have a running start if
you're an existing media brand.
"You have a
credibility, but you"
have to do it in a way that's
interesting.
You have to engage people once
they're there.
And you have to make it so that
they want to keep coming back.
>> The Post reports that
Continental and United have been
discussing a potential...
>> And when they come... and
"when that's the
habit they form,"
you've got them.
Advertisers will follow.
Revenue will follow.
You still need to own that time.
The worst thing that you... the
situation can be is you lose
them to some other source of
information on the web.
Then getting them back is going
to be impossible.
">> Meantime, the holidays are"
saved for some parents.
>> I would make a prediction
that in the next five to ten
years somebody with deep pockets
is going to decide that there's
a great opportunity to create
local-based news offerings that
don't have a newspaper attached
to it at all.
You wouldn't have the came cost
structure as the newspaper.
But if you were putting out a
product that was of equal
quality and perhaps much more
attractive and sort of web-like
"in its approach,
you might take"
a lot of their audience away.
And because your cost basis
"would be lower,
you could make a"
lot of money on that.
">> NARRATOR: But for now, ad"
revenues on the web are still
far short of newspapers.
Many are wondering how long it
will take to close the gap and
what might be lost in the
transition to the web.
">> At the moment, it's the"
printed newspaper that pays most
of the cost of my newsroom.
But the digital side is coming
on awfully fast.
Whether every newspaper will get
there or whether everyone will
"get there in the same way, I"
wouldn't predict that.
"You know, some newspapers will"
">> You know, no... that's..."
that's fair.
"I mean, the question is, are"
there people who would pay you
rational prices for the L.A.
Times?
>> NARRATOR: With its stock
price dipping and shareholders
"in revolt, the Tribune Company"
effectively put itself up for
sale in the Fall of 2006.
">> Look, nobody is happy about"
"this, that is for
sure, but this"
comes under the category of
trying to improve a tough
situation.
>> NARRATOR: The possibility had
now opened up that there would
be a new owner for the L.A.
Times.
>> I think the Los Angeles Times
needs local ownership.
>> BERGMAN: That simple?
>> It's that simple.
I think we're better off with
local ownership.
"I think a newspaper is really,"
"in many ways, the soul of the"
"city, the soul
of the community."
And I think with local ownership
a better job can be done.
( applause )
>> NARRATOR: Eli Broad is a
billionaire housing developer
turned philanthropist and art
patron in Los Angeles.
>> He's actually almost single-
handedly making this the arts
capital of the country.
>> NARRATOR: He is one of three
wealthy men in L.A. who have
proposed doing what a number of
other moguls around the country
have attempted in recent years:
buying back troubled local
papers from their corporate
owners.
>> BERGMAN: Do you have any
background in journalism?
>> I have no background in
journalism whatsoever.
>> BERGMAN: Just a consumer?
>> I'm a consumer.
I'm an avid reader of
newspapers.
I read three papers every day.
>> BERGMAN: You would be willing
to put money into a foundation
that would then buy the Los
Angeles Times?
">> Yeah, our foundation might"
join other foundations in buying
"the Los Angeles Times, and be"
happy with a lesser return than
other investments would yield.
>> BERGMAN: But are you willing
to say how far down you're
willing to go?
">> Well, I think if it returns"
"5%, 6%, 7%, 8%
or 9%, that would"
be just fine.
>> BERGMAN: But would you get
involved in the editorial
content?
">> I might, especially when it"
comes to areas in culture and
education reform and other
areas.
>> BERGMAN: You might get
involved in those areas?
>> Yes.
>> BERGMAN: Should we tell the
senior management at the L.A.
Times that if Mr. Broad buys
the newspaper your jobs are
safe?
>> You certainly could.
I think Dean Baquet and others
are doing a fine job at the L.A.
Times.
>> BERGMAN: Eli Broad and many
other people that we talked...
>> A good guy.
( laughs )
>> BERGMAN: I'll back up for a
minute.
>> A very handsome guy.
( laughter )
">> BERGMAN: Well,
Mr. Broad said"
that he would be satisfied with
6% to 9% profit.
>> I think that sound... you
"know, that sounds great."
>> BERGMAN: Eli Broad told us
"he's willing to accept 5%, 6%,"
"7%, 8% profit if he owned the"
Los Angeles Times.
Why isn't the Tribune Company?
You're already making 20%.
>> Yeah.
"Well, as a public company, one"
answer would be the stock price
would go way below where it's
"currently going, which is way"
below where it used to be.
So a private owner like Mr.
"Broad would be
able to say, I'll"
earn X percent.
"And if he's the owner, he gets"
to say that.
"If Wall Street's
the owner, they"
get to say what their
expectations are for what a
publicly-owned business is
expected to achieve.
That's just... as brutal as it
"may seem, that's
kind of a fact"
of life of the business world.
>> Newspapers are in such an odd
position in the... in the... I
"mean, we're almost
like a public"
trust that has private
"ownership, and I
don't think any"
"ownership is quite perfect,"
though I like the St. Pete
Times' ownership model.
>> BERGMAN: Because it's a non-
profit?
>> It's a non-profit.
>> NARRATOR: The St. Petersburg
Times is the largest newspaper
"in Florida, with a reputation"
for solid journalism.
It is owned by the non-profit
Poynter Institute and supports
itself on half of what Wall
Street demands.
>> The idea that all of the
world should be measured in
dollars to stockholders is
actually a relatively new idea.
Used to be that we thought
businesses had their purpose.
Their purpose was to be making
newspapers or fountain pens or
whatever.
And now we act as though the
only purpose of a business is to
enrich the people who traded on
Wall Street.
I don't agree with that.
I think that's a wrongheaded
view.
Of course you've got to have
"profit, of course
you've got to"
"support your ownership, but"
that's not why we're doing it.
We're doing it because
publishing a newspaper is a
crucial thing to be doing.
>> In Denver...
>> NARRATOR: National Public
Radio is another kind of non-
"profit success story, now"
reaching about 26 million people
a week.
A Harris poll in 2005 found that
NPR was the most trusted news
source in the country.
And they've still got a bureau
in Baghdad.
">> BERGMAN: You
know, there are"
non-profit ownership situations
with major newspapers-- St.
"Petersburg Times, it's very"
"successful, it's become the"
"largest newspaper in Florida,"
"and also NPR, so..."
>> All we need then is a not-
for-profit who wants to spend
$14 billion to buy the Tribune
"Company, and then you'd be all"
set.
"So, if you know one of those,"
have them call me.
>> NARRATOR: Most of the
surviving newspapers in the
country that still devote
significant resources to in-
depth reporting have one thing
in common: family control.
">> You know, I
wake up every day"
grateful for the Sulzberger
family because... and the same
thing would be true of some of
the other major newspapers that
have similar arrangements--
"The Washington Post, which is"
under the control of the Graham
"family, the Wall
Street Journal"
"under the Bancroft
family, once"
upon a time the L.A. Times under
"the Chandler family-- and, you"
"know, all of these companies"
"have run very
sound, profitable"
businesses while sustaining
"that, you know,
civic function,"
"you know, of providing good"
journalism.
And they've been able to do that
because they didn't have to
respond in a kind of panic to
every quarterly return.
>> NARRATOR: Back in Los
"Angeles, Dean Baquet was still"
refusing to make the staff cuts
his publisher demanded.
"Once again, he
made it a public"
"issue-- this time, in a speech"
to other newspaper editors.
>> I said that I thought that
some of my colleagues as editors
had let me know privately how
angry they were about the cuts
they had to make.
And I said that maybe they
shouldn't be so quiet about it.
So when the company asked for
yet another round of significant
"cuts in staff,
I felt compelled"
to say no.
">> Well, I'm all for people"
saying what's on their mind.
And if they want to do it
"publicly, that's fine."
Not my style.
I wouldn't do that.
But it wasn't so much that he
said it and that he said it
"publicly, but it
did help gel in"
my mind that we really didn't
see the business the same way.
">> NARRATOR: On
November 7, word"
spread through the Times
newsroom that Dean Baquet had
been fired.
">> The staff crowded around,"
"hundreds of
people, and I stood"
up on a desk and confirmed it.
I... I was choked up.
It was very emotional.
It's a great staff.
"What I kept
thinking was, think"
of what I've been through with
this newsroom.
I have personally laid people
off in this newsroom.
"And I've had to
say ""No"" in this"
newsroom.
And I can't tell you how... I
can't tell you what it's like to
go out as an editor and still
have your newsroom support you
when you've had to do hard
stuff.
It meant a lot to me.
>> NARRATOR: Since leaving the
"Los Angeles Times, Dean"
"Baquet's old colleague, editor"
"John Carroll, has spent time"
"writing and
teaching at Harvard,"
"reflecting on
what he calls ""a"
"crisis of the
soul"" in American"
journalism.
>> I'm very sentimental about
"newspapers, but I also am very"
clearheaded about the fact that
newspapers are doing the
reporting in this country.
Google and Yahoo and those
people aren't putting reporters
on the street in any numbers at
all.
Blogs can't afford it.
Network television is taking
reporters off the street.
Commercial radio journalism is
almost nonexistent.
And the newspapers are the last
ones standing.
And newspapers are threatened.
And reporting is absolutely an
essential thing for democratic
self-government.
Who's going to do it?
Who's going to pay for the news?
If newspapers fall by the
"wayside, what will we know?"
">> Extra, extra,
read all about"
it!
Los Angeles Times celebrates
125 years.
>> NARRATOR: Not long after he
"fired Dean Baquet, publisher"
David Hiller turned up at a
ceremony honoring the L.A. Times
with a star on Hollywood
Boulevard.
>> Thanks for having us on this
great day.
>> NARRATOR: But the paper's
fate was never more uncertain.
Eli Broad made a bid to buy the
"Times and its parent company,"
Tribune.
So did the Chandler family that
once owned the Times.
"But so far, the
Tribune Company"
has not accepted any of the
"bids, leaving
the future of one"
of America's great newspapers
>> This report continues on
"Frontline's web
site, where you"
can watch the full program
"again online, access a databae"
of dozens of interviews with
"journalists, media analysts ad"
network news and internet
experts...
">> ...what we
refer to as ""info"
"snacking."""
>> ...read more on the future
of newspapers...
">> We're, in fact, critically"
dependent on the success of
these newspapers.
>> ...the internet's impact on
news and in-depth reporting ad
who will pay for the news in
the future.
Then join the discussion at
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
>> Funding for Frontline is
provided by:
The Park Foundation--
committed to raising public
awareness.
With major funding for News Wr
from the Richard and Rhoda
Goldman Foundation.
And additional funding from te
Nathan Cummings Foundation.
Frontline is made possible by
contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.